# IKMB GWAS Association Testing Pipeline

## Prerequisites
- Nextflow: https://www.nextflow.io/
- Java 8 or higher
- Singularity 3.4 or higher
- A dataset in chromosome-wise .vcf.gz format. The dataset *must have* a DS tag for dosage data or a GT tag for genotyped data. If both are present, DS is chosen. 
- Annotations and FAM files as generated by [The QC Pipeline](https://github.com/ikmb/gwas-qc/) (i.e. `dataset_individuals_annotation.txt` and `dataset.fam`)
- Optionally, a whitespace-separated file with additional covariates for association testing (see below)

Please ensure that you have 16 GB RAM installed on the computer where you intend to run the pipeline (i.e. your local computer or your HPC compute nodes).

## Quick Start

1. Run the [Quality Control Pipeline on the example](https://github.com/ikmb/gwas-qc/blob/master/Readme.md#quick-start) first
    - all files necessary for the association testing pipeline are automatically generated
2. Run the wrapper script (included in example package): `bash run-assoc.sh`


## How to Start

→ If you are working on the UKSH medcluster, please see [Advanced Configuration](https://github.com/ikmb/gwas-qc/#uksh-medcluster-configuration) first.

Fortunately, the association testing pipeline itself requires very little configuration. If you intend to run the pipeline on an HPC cluster, please review the advanced configuration items first.

You will need to:
- A set of `.vcf.gz` files with the following specifics:
    - at most one chromosome per `.vcf.gz` file. Multiple chromosomes per files are not supported. If a file happens to have multiple chromosomes, only the first will be analyzed.
    - any chromosome codes are supported (i.e. `chrX`, `X`, `23`, `chr23`, `chromosomeX` are just fine)
    - your VCF files require dosage data (DS tag) for imputed data or genotype calls (GT tag) for genotyped data. If both tags are found, DS is chosen.
    - the `INFO` column in the VCF files should contain an imputation score. This is used to filter the input variants to create a good null model for SAIGE. For topmed imputations, we found `R2>0.8` to yield good results. If the given tag is not found in the VCF file, the default value 1.0 is assumed, making all variants pass the filter. This filter is not used for Plink-based association testing. 
- A FAM file to update sex and phenotype from. Only those files in the FAM file will be used from the VCFs. Note that *all* samples from the FAM file must be present in the VCF files. **Note: if the FAM family ID is 0, the sample name in the VCF should be the individual ID. If the FID is not 0, the sample name should be the family ID and the individual ID with an underscore (i.e. FID 1234 IID 9876 should be 1234_9876 in the VCF file)**
- The genome build of the input data, which will result in SAIGE handling the sex chromosomes according to the coordinates of the pseudoautosomal regions. Possible values are 37 and 38.
- Optionally, you can specify additional covariates to be used in association testing. By default, 10 principal components are automatically generated and used. If you want additional covariates, have a whitespace-separated file with a header at hand. The first column should be the sample ID in `FID_IID` format, any futher column is treated as a covariate. Specify the covars file with `--more_covars $FILE` and the columns to be used with `--more_covars_cols AGE,SEX`, where `AGE` and `SEX` are the respective column headers from the covar file that you wish to be included.

The following wrapper script is also included in [the example](https://github.com/ikmb/gwas-qc/blob/master/Readme.md#quick-start)
```bash
# For additional clarity, we use variables here.

# a shell-like glob expression for specifying VCF.GZ file sets.
# Note the additional quoting, we do not want the shell to expand the '*'
INPUT="$HOME/example/output/Example/QCed/"'*.noATCG.vcf.gz'

# Filter by these FAM files. In our example, they are the same as in the VCF
FAM="$HOME/example/output/Example/QCed/1000G_QCed.fam"

# Individuals annotation as generated by the QC Pipeline
ANNO="$HOME/example/output/Example/QCed/1000G_QCed.annotation.txt"

# Name prefix of the output files
NAME="1000G"

# Target folder
OUTPUT="output/Example/Assoc"

# Actual call
# The Assoc.config defines computation resources and can be fine-tuned if necessary. You can
# use the one from the example package or the generic one from 
# https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ikmb/gwas-assoc/master/Assoc.config

if [ ! -f Assoc.config ]; then
    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ikmb/gwas-assoc/master/Assoc.config
fi

nextflow run -c Assoc.config ikmb/gwas-assoc \
    --input_imputed_glob "$INPUT" \
    --fam "$FAM" \
    --collection_name "$NAME" \
    --output "$OUTPUT" \
    --build 37
```

The pipeline output and reports will be written to the ```Assoc_output``` directory.

### Parameters

The following list covers all parameters that may be specified for the Association Testing Pipeline:

```
--input_imputed_glob [glob]     A glob expression to specify the .vcf.gz files that should be used
                                for association analysis
--fam [file.fam]                 A Plink-style FAM file that will be used to select a
                                subset of samples from the provided VCFs
--collection_name [name]        Output filename prefix
--output [directory]            Output directory
--more_covars [covars.txt]      Optional, whitespace-separated list of covariates. See above.
--more_covars_cols [COL1,COL2]  Optional, comma-separated list of covar column header names
--null_filter [filter]          Optional, bcftools-style formatted INFO filter for generation of
                                the SAIGE null model. Default: "R2>0.8"
--build [build]                 Genome build, 37 or 38
--trait [type]                  Trait type to analyze. May be 'binary' (default) or 'quantitative')
-resume                         Restart where the pipeline was cancelled or aborted. May or may
                                not work, depending on your filesystem specifics
```

## Advanced Configuration
Please refer to the [Advanced Configuration section of the QC Pipeline](https://github.com/ikmb/gwas-qc/#advanced-configuration) The same principles apply.

## UK Biobank Proof-of-concept
If you are directly working with UK Biobank's BGEN files, you may either convert them to VCF format and use the regular Assoc pipeline as described above. If you are merely interested in plain association testing with SAIGE and you are fine with leaving out all the additional features the full pipeline uses (Plink regression, Sample filtering, liftover/build conversion, etc.) you might want to look at our proof-of-concept script collection that we used for our recent COVID-19 analysis. It is not ready-to-use but should provide a solid foundation for your own scripts. Also, it currently relies on SLURM, SQLite3, Plink2 and Singularity to be installed on your HPC or workstation.

In this example, you will need to extract the first 10 principal components, sex and age from the UK Biobank phenotype database and the phenotype from the recently-published COVID-19 test result table dumps. The script folder contains a `generate_annotations.sh` script to aid you in this process.

1. Change the `env` file to suit your needs. You will also need to give a path to a single Plink dataset containing all genotype calls that you want in your SAIGE model. You might need to create it by merging the single-chromosome bim/bed/fams first.
2. Run `1_prune.sh` to prepare the genotype calls for model generation
3. Run `2_build_model.sh` to generate the SAIGE model. It also pulls the necessary SAIGE docker container. It might take a few days to complete.
4. Run `3_saige_spa.sh` to perform association testing. It spawns a lot of SLURM jobs and generates a lot of temporary files in the current working directory
5. Run `4_sumstats.sh` to collect all the result snippets into a single summary statistics text file that you may use for later analysis

## Citation instructions

If you use our software in any published work, please cite our BIGwas software and methods paper: 

Kässens JC, Wienbrandt L, Ellinghaus D. BIGwas: Single-command quality control
and association testing for multi-cohort and biobank-scale GWAS/PheWAS data.
Gigascience. 2021 Jun 29;10(6):giab047.

## License
MIT License

Copyright (c) 2020 Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

